[Speaker X:] Okay, here's that, but yeah. So, like I said, the specific thing that I'm looking at is diversity, so
it's just about, like, racial diversity. Gender diversity across campus and, like, the way that people fit in
considering the fact that U of T and Scarborough, there's, like, a diverse mix here. It's like a melting pot for cultures, pretty much. And so, yeah, so a lot of the questions are just
gonna be focused around your experience at U of T and, like, the community of Scarborough and, like, how you feel, like, being here
and, like, if you feel included, that sort of thing. So, my first question for you is just talk to me a little bit about
why you decided to come to UTSC. [Speaker X:] Yeah, so, basically, I feel like I decided to come to UTSC because it is part of U of T and because it is a.
I felt like, in my opinion, it was a well-rounded school and I felt like it was also, I mean, we all know
it's a pretty prestigious school. So that was, like, the big bonus. Also, I have a brother who's a year older than me
and he actually went to U of T before I did. He's a year older, well, yeah, I said that. He's a year older than me, and he said that he enjoyed certain things about
living in Toronto, and there were certain aspects that he liked, and I think also I wanted to come to UTSC because
it was still Toronto, but it was. It wasn't downtown where I felt like I would be almost lost in the huge population
at that campus, so coming here plus when I saw the residences here I felt more confident in making my decision. Also, I wanted to experience what it was like
to live away from home, and experiencing something new and try living on my own. So, yeah, I think that was probably
the biggest thing that made me come here. [Speaker X:] Right, and you know, I know that you'll go in the reserves, right?
So can you just talk about, you know. What was it like transitioning from living on a reserve to moving to Scarborough? [Speaker X:] Yeah, so, basically, I, well, I was born
in the city of London, but I was raised on Oneida Nation of the Thames, which is a first nations community outside of London, Ontario.
And I grew up there until I was 18 and I moved away to come to UTSC and growing up there, it almost felt like
I didn't really know anything else. Like, I would commute to the city to go to post secondary school and I would get an experience of
what a city was like then, but I never actually lived in a city, so then coming to Scarborough from a reserve was a really, almost a giant leap
that I didn't even realise myself in my first year because I thought that I had experienced things like the cities because my mom used to
work in Toronto, and I would visit her or we'd have field trips to Toronto or things like that, and I felt that oh, you know, living there is gonna be really nice.
It's gonna be something different. And I guess the thing is what I didn't realise until much later in my academic career is that
I actually miss home a lot more than I thought I ever would and I actually get a feeling that I'm almost living in two worlds at some point
because living on the reserve, it's always gonna be my home, and it's something that I will always know but it is a lot different than, say living in Toronto or Scarborough.
I feel like people don't realise that there are things that they pretty much can take for granted that we don't have.
Like, we don't have, sometimes we don't have clean water and we don't have paved roads and we don't have a public transit, so.
Sometimes in my first year and even now I think it's hilarious when people complain about the TTC or they complain about oh wow, you know, this train is late, where is it?
But they should recognise that there's people here in this country who don't even have that access to get to the cities
where they can't even access things like grocery stores or hospitals or clinics and I guess that's one thing that
I really realised moving to the city as well is that there's a lot more accessibility towards things. Also, you can take a bus to get to the grocery store. You can go see a movie whenever you want.
You can go shopping whenever you want whereas when I was living at home you had to have a car to do all that stuff
and, like, that's a privilege in itself, right? So, definitely different, also what I found when I moved to Scarborough is that
I, not only, not only the environment changed but also the people changed, so in my community it was as if I blended in with everyone else because we were all Oneida.
We all pretty much knew our history. We all know different parts of our culture and we all have a feeling of connectedness
and I feel like we are a very kind people as well. We are very generous people, so coming to Scarborough and feeling like no one really knew me
or even knew my identity, it was kind of like what, like, how do you not know what I am, you know, all my neighbours know who I am, all my teachers know who I am
and that was really hard to deal with because as a young growing woman, right? You don't even know how to talk about
these things like identity, you don't know what these things mean to you because you're growing yourself, you're trying to
figure that out, so coming here and trying to explain 500 years of colonialism to another first year when you are trying to figure out the 500 years of colonialism yourself.
It's really hard and challenging and I know that it made me, it made me really miss home a lot, it made me
miss that feeling that I don't need to explain all these things and I don't need to answer these questions, and also
random things of, because I feel like Scarborough is so diverse and because Scarborough has so many different people coming from across the world that
it's almost a common question to say where are you from or what's your background. What's your whatever, and whenever I got that question
people always thought I was latino or from some sort of South American descent but even though, you know, my brothers
and sisters are from there, it's, you know. That's not really who I am, and it almost was like every time I was faced with a question of what's your background, I always had to
come with a history lesson, and I feel like that's a lot of pressure to put on a young, growing person, so.
[Speaker X:] Right, and can you talk to me more specifically just about your experience at UTSC? [Speaker X:] Yeah, so, my experience at UTSC.
Well, I mean, it's had its up and its downs. So, basically, when I first entered UTSC I was a specialist in computer science, so that was really different, I think I more so
gravitated towards that because of the type of courses I took in high school and one thing I didn't really realise
when I first entered the programme was how male dominated the programme was and that was really, that was really
overwhelming, I thought, and especially too because even the department itself is very male dominated, so as a woman. Not only a young woman but an Aboriginal woman
or even a woman of colour, you feel pretty, you know, pretty marginalised in classes like that, so I started off
in that programme living on residence and it was definitely an experience and learned a lot in my first year.
Learned what to do, what not to do but there's a lot of hard lessons too. Like in my first year, I really realised that classes are way different than high school classes
and I actually found myself on academic probation and I didn't realise much later what that actually meant because
I thought, you know, what, I'm trying so hard. I study, I go to the office hours. I try and I talk to my peers, I get help
and yet I am still doing pretty mediocre and even failing some of these courses. So that was really hard to get over 'cause as someone who was always
a straight A student, pretty much, it was like what, a C, what, a D, you know, so. Those were hurdles in themselves
and I guess another thing that I had to basically get over, get through was that I actually, I did another term of school
and I actually found myself on an academic suspension, so that was really hard because basically the University is telling you you can't go here for X amount of time
because of your abilities, your grades and it really made me have to evaluate what I was doing here, it made me
really evaluate is this right for me? Is this what I want to do, is this my passion? What is passion, it brings up all these questions
and especially as someone who isn't from Scarborough 'cause you're choosing to live here and study here so that's even, like, a bigger question. So, I took the time during my suspension
and I had to work at this cafe downtown to support the rest of my lease at where I was renting from, and that was really.
That was an experience in itself. Commuting downtown every day to serve coffee and donuts. Yep, it made me really really realise that
if I don't do something, this is probably what I'm gonna have to do for a long time to try and support myself, so I really took some time and I feel like I got
a lot of guidance from my family and from some peers, and I enrolled in 2014 summer back into courses still as a second year student.
(laughs) And I took some courses and I did a lot better. Raised my GPA a bit and was excited.
Was determined to make it work and I also was. I was working as a work study student with Department of Student Life as the Aboriginal Outreach Coordinator
and that was a really great experience. It really helped me connect to my culture and it also helped me connect to this campus
because through that work and through that job I met so many people here who are doing similar work and have similar passions in terms of talking about
or having events or having discussions about what needs to change in the world and even what needs to change within U of T or our campus, and so I had a pretty good summer.
I felt like I was pretty determined to continue with my work study position. So then I entered in the fall.
And the academics for the year didn't really go that well for me. There was different living situations
that were a little bit hard to deal with. I had kind of an incompetent landlord. (laughs) And I had to move during my finals.
So that was really stressful, so. My grades throughout the year were not what I hoped they would be, but
at the same time, I continued to work at my work study position and I did a lot of events this year, probably
a lot more than I should've, I think I definitely put a lot more on my plate than I should have, but at the same time I'm really glad that I did what I did this year because
I learned a lot, I grew a lot this year because I ended up moving out of where I was living, I moved a lot closer to campus.
I feel like I became more independent and I also feel like I had a better understanding of what I wanted to do, so pretty much
over the past, I don't know, year I've shifted my gears away from computer science because that is not my passion. I do not like coding and I don't like calculus
and I have shifted it towards a health studies programme. I'm thinking I'm leaning more towards health policy because I think health is definitely
a subject I'm interested in and it's something that's important to me in terms of Aboriginal communities and Aboriginal people, and I definitely
see a future for myself within that spectrum. So yeah, so basically I ended off my academic year, raised my GPA again a little bit and it's, you know, looking brighter.
Feel a lot happier with myself. Feel happier with my habits and my academic choices and I feel like I'm definitely
geared toward something that I can do and I can finish and I guess the cherry on top was when I went to the SCSU Formal
and I got an award, I got the Social Justice award and I guess it was really enlightening and it was also, really, I felt really honoured because there's so many people who I meet here
and who I come across who are doing really great things and who are. They're really living a good life
to help others see what equality is and what equity is, and so to get that award I felt really honoured because not only am I doing it
but I have 50 other people behind me doing it too and 100 others behind them doing it. So, you know, it was really nice and it also kind of made me feel like
doing all this stuff was worth it. Not that we don't do this stuff to get awards. We don't do this stuff to get recognised.
The important thing is to be humble and to know that you're doing these things for the greater good, because there are things
that are supposed to get done, but on top of, you know, the academics. I kind of realised, you know, things like social justice and equity are things
that I'm geared towards, so yeah. [Speaker X:] And just speaking to, you know, you having low and low academic standing when you
first came in to university and stuff. Can you talk to me a little bit about how that might have been the result of
such a long history of an Aboriginal woman not making it to university? [Speaker X:] Yeah, for sure, I feel like I didn't even really understand a lot about my identity
or the history of our people until. I know that my mom would educate me a lot about certain things and she would say
read this book, watch this movie. Do these things, and so I would. People would always ask me that.
How do you know so much, it's like well, I read. Well, I feel like I'm definitely a visual kinesthetic learner, I watch videos. I watch movies, I like talking to people
and hearing what they have to say. I like hearing their stories, and one thing that I really realise is that the education
for Aboriginal people here is shit. Like, it is, and basically what this government has taught us is to fear education
and to fear things, to fear being a part of society 'cause that's exactly what they tried to do. They assimilate us and they try to make us like everyone else and surprise surprise.
That doesn't work, and it creates these cycles of trauma and it creates these cycles of abuse and also what
it ultimately creates is these cycles of fear. So, I know that where I grew up in my community, people, they have a fear of
the education system because their parents or their grandparents, they may have been part of the coolest schools in this country where you are not even, you're
not even human at these schools. You're pretty much just a blank canvas that they. Basically, it's like you're taking
a young child and you're just painting them white and making them what you want them to be and I guess, you know, the colonisers are
perfect at doing that, and I guess just speaking to my own experience in terms of education, my grandparents. They think well, they didn't go to residential school
but I remember when they would tell me stories that my grandpa, he would tell me about how, well, we don't like
using the term Indian, how he wasn't allowed to speak Indian in school, that they would either get beat or they would get sent home
or they would say you can't speak that here. So, he was told when he first went to school that you can't speak your language, and what country do we live in, you know, he went to grade school
in the 50s, that was only 60 years ago. So, of course our children and youth are gonna be, you know, they're not gonna be
the greatest students in this westernised society and so when I think of his experience and how he was told not to speak his language.
Not to practise his culture, he grew up with that mindset, and to him, being successful in this Euro-centric society is what keeps us alive. Because if we don't, it's like.
If we don't assimilate, we die. And so you have to almost assimilate part of you to even be welcomed
so basically he did not pass on the language to my mom or my uncle because, well, I mean, why would you
pass on something that's not gonna be allowed in school, so my grandfather. He started working at Ford on the assembly line and then he worked at Ford for 30 years after
and he's probably one of my greatest idols because, you know, it takes one hell of a work ethic to stand there and do
the same thing every day, and I feel like I definitely get my work ethic from him and I'm so thankful that I have that.
And, you know, he taught the same thing to my mom. She didn't get to grow up with her language and that's a thing that people don't realise and that's the thing that people take for granted.
(sighs) I think language is so key to certain things as well because language expresses parts of
your culture that you can't express in a colonised tongue, so she didn't grow up with that, and I know that
for her and for my grandmother and for me. If you look at those three generations. Being a Native woman, being an Aboriginal woman in Canada means so many different things
between those three generations because, you know, back then, it was illegal to do many a things, Native people
in Canada weren't even allowed to vote until the 60s so technically we weren't even considered citizens of Canada.
And then shifting from that to how it is now it's kind of crazy when you think about it. Even thinking about Native people in educational institutions, our people
weren't even allowed inside U of T and, like, now look at where I am. So, when I think about that and I think about that
I can so see that systemic racism working its way through my family and I really see the change, but I also see
the hardships that have come across. Even when I think about myself and my education, it's kind of funny because when I was in grade school and I was
going to school on The Rez, there's elders who would come in and they would teach us the language, they would teach us
the numbers, the days of the week, the animals. Different stuff like that so that we could say little phrases, and then when I think back to
my mom's generation, they didn't have those classes. It was no, you speak English here. So, it's kind of scary to think how in a span of 50, 60, 70 years, almost an entire culture
can be erased, an entire people can be erased. That's what people don't realise about Canada. I feel like people think it's some sort of
safe haven or some sort of paradise and I mean, it is in terms of democracy and war and things like that, and trying to
escape terror, but at the same time our people are living in terror. Our people are living in wars. And when I think back to things like that
I think back to how, you know. Comparing my education to the education of my peers who lived in the city.
I didn't learn certain things until much later grades compared to my city peers, I guess. And thinking about things like
I had people in my class when we finally got to grade seven where we went to school off the reserve, they couldn't read. If you give them a novel, they can't read it
and, you know, it really speaks to the underfunding that is given to these schools in these communities
and even when I look at things like the budgets in London, the Times Valley District school board, the average tuition
for an elementary school child is seven grand for the 10 months whereas for us for the 10 months, it's probably $3500. So, if we have half the amount of funding
then the provencial standard or even the surrounding regional standard of course we're not gonna survive.
Of course we're gonna drop out. Of course it's gonna be like that. And I never really realised these things
until much later, and the thing is because of the work ethic that was passed on to me from my mom and from my grandpa is I had to work, I had to seek these things that
people take for granted, I had to seek getting an at-par education when other people got it for free because
it was never offered to me, so having that work ethic and having it spill over into the next coming years, that really
helped me grow as a person, it really helped me get the good grades that I needed to get into U of T, and I guess the thing is that because I was in smaller.
Well, because high school is generally smaller classes you can connect with your teachers and you can connect with the people around you
and I was very fortunate because the high school that I went to to connect with people like that who really understood
where I was coming from and who really understood me as a hard worker and having the history and the background that I have, but the thing that was really overwhelming was
coming here, and coming here, I feel not necessarily UTSC, but coming to an institution like U of T that was
built for rich white men is that you can feel the institutionalised racism. You can feel it almost in the air sometimes
and that was really hard to deal with because as, well, I think as all young people you don't know who you are, you know? You don't know, like, are you a young woman?
Are you a young Aboriginal person? Are you a young Aboriginal woman? Are you, like, what are you, are you
a daughter, are you an adult, are you a kid, are you? And you're figuring out all these things but at the same time, you're trying to
grow in an institution that is telling you certain things, and I guess that's one thing that I really learned over the past couple of years too is that, for example.
In other countries, there's wars and there's violence that is literally keeping people from doing things.
But the scary thing that I find here is that it's very hidden, and it's very subtle. These types of things are federally legislated
to keep us down, you know, and when you think about the Indian Act, how we weren't even allowed to leave the communities. We weren't even allowed to go to schools
and I guess what I really learned here and what I really hear a lot of the other powerful women say here is that
your existence is resistance because these places weren't made for us. They weren't, 'cause, you know, like.
They're trying to keep us out. And that's one thing that I learned too is that people I went to high school with and people that I see here that don't, aren't
necessarily successful by societal or Euro-westernized standards, they're not drop outs. They're not losers, they're push-outs
because these places don't want us here. So they want us to leave, and I guess that's also really hard to deal with because
sometimes I feel like, well, especially when I'm in school is I wake up every day and it's like I have to fight colonialism but it's, like, I'm in it, I'm swimming in it.
Trying to keep my roots intact and trying to stay connected to my people and my family and my culture is, you know.
That's really important because we didn't have that before, but now we do. We do, to some extent, have that now
and I guess that's one thing that my mom always told me that her parents taught her is that the white man basically took everything away from us. He took our land, he took our culture
and he took our language and he took our children. But, he can't take our minds, so you have to use your mind as much as possible.
So, that's things like education. That's things like getting experience. That's things like talking to people.
So that's what I try to do every day, yeah. [Speaker X:] And just speaking, you know, to that sense of community that you talked about, talking specifically to UTSC and when you first came here.
Did you feel a sense of community? [Speaker X:] Yeah, so basically. [Speaker X:] Well, specifically to--
(background noise drowns out interviewer) [Speaker X:] Yeah, so pretty much what I found is that I realise that the clubs you become a part of
in high school, it can also transition sometimes to university or post-secondary because you might have had a chess club in high school. Maybe there's a chess club in university, so
when I was in high school, I was part of the Native Student Association, so coming to UTSC as a bubbly first year student
I was like oh, cool, I'll find the Native Student Association. So I look around campus, like, wherever.
Where's the room, I don't see it. Where's the elder on campus, I don't see them. Where's this, this, and this, you know, it's like. I didn't see any of that, and I thought
wow, does no one go here, are there no other Native students here, and then one day I stumbled across the person who was
the Aboriginal Outreach Coordinator at the time at Department of Student Life and she was really cool. She definitely invited me to all the events.
She had a lot of these opportunities that I was interested in and it was really cool and I met some other peers that were like me and that was really fun, that was really
interesting to see that hey, there's other people that are doing the same thing that I'm doing. You know, it's someone you can connect with.
But I guess kind of the thing too is that there wasn't a lot of us, plus we also were in scattering years, so we didn't really
have time to connect or even really get to know each other, and then I really realised that not that there was a lack. I feel like the thing is UTSC students are
ready for an indigenous movement. They're ready for something that is anti-colonial, that is rooted to the land
but it's almost like people are scared or people are almost afraid to ask certain things so I really saw that after my first year
and spilling into my second year is when I started work study at TSL and through that I really saw that people have a lot of questions here
and after that year, I really. I connected with things like the women's centre. SCSU, different clubs on campus
and I saw what other people were doing and I guess I really realised that there was pretty much a lack of services
and events and spaces for Aboriginal students here and I really wanted to change that and sometimes it's kind of overwhelming because I kind of feel like as a student
doing it all by myself, so it's almost like I'm this one person fighting this whole thing. Fighting this colonialism, but at the same time
I met a lot of great people and I also, I've worked a lot with the elder on campus, Cat. And he's great, he, you know, I feel like
we're both, we're fighting for the same thing and we're working together and we're getting there. He is definitely more of the staff faculty side. I feel like I'm more of the outreach
getting to know other clubs side and I feel like we both kind of get the word out there about what's happening on campus
and I like that we can talk about a lot of similar things and we can get students engaged, so I really like that.
And I guess it was just kind of like. It's sometimes overwhelming because I feel like I really can't necessarily connect with any other student on this campus
because not everyone has the same background as I do and that can be really intimidating and scary and it's also kind of, like, no one
really feels what I feel, also no one really understands my story because, well, I mean to be fair, we can all say that
but at the same time I feel like there are larger groups on campus where you can connect with other people whereas Aboriginal people at this campus
definitely lacking, I know that there's a lot of great resources downtown with First Nations House and they have
awesome programming, they have, like, amazing stuff and staff there, and I've definitely connected to events there, but, you know.
I live here and I study here and I wanted to see something grow here because I feel like it's pretty important, and if so many students are inquiring about it and asking questions
then why shouldn't, why don't we have an elder here all week, why don't we have space on campus, why don't we have
even a course, we don't have an Aboriginal studies course here. So, it's like asking these questions
and what are the answers to them? [Speaker X:] Right, and I guess, like, when it comes to feeling safe on campus or knowing there's a certain space that, you know.
You really kind of clung to and said this space makes me feel comfortable and this space makes me feel included.
[Speaker X:] Yeah, yeah, yeah, I, well, I mean. In all honesty, probably no space on campus makes me feel 100% comfortable.
I probably feel the most comfortable in the valley or by myself in the valley because I feel connected to the land. I feel like I'm with The Mother.
I'm with Mother Earth, I feel like I'm almost. I feel like I'm almost at peace when I'm there because it reminds me of home a lot.
In terms of space, in all honesty I only feel comfortable when I'm at home. Most of the time when I'm with my mom.
I'm with my brother, or even when I'm just with my people, right, because we go through these struggles together because they truly understand what it is
and I don't connect with people here like that and I know that, for example, women of colour connect because of the oppression that's faced
and the oppression that's placed on women in this country, but I feel like because most of the time at this campus
I am portrayed as a spokesperson for my people or peoples, it's really intimidating and almost makes me not want to go to those spaces. I've been to spaces on this campus before
where it's sometimes really awkward for me. Sometimes I'm just not in the mood to explain things, you know, usually how it goes is
I'm in a space and chilling, doing homework. Eating, whatever, just talking to friends. Talking to folks or whatever, and you know.
It comes across, oh, what's your background? Where are you from, oh, I'm from Oneida or I'm Oneida or I'm first nations or Aboriginal and then it's well, what tribe?
Well, from where, um, do you go to school for free? Do you know how to say anything in Native? Or like oh, can you explain to me this?
And the thing is what people don't realise is Aboriginal people are pretty much the only people in Canada that get asked these questions.
Like, do you go to school for free, like, do we ask any other group in Canada that question? Do you go to school for free, no. Do you pay taxes, do you live in a teepee?
And it can be really, you know, frustrating and it can be really overwhelming and it makes me not want to go to these places.
I guess in terms of being comfortable. I like being comfortable, or I am more comfortable with people who are awake and who are
socially conscious, if you, I don't feel necessarily the best when I'm around people who aren't socially conscious and who actually are ignorant.
I was doing outreach and I was in the Student Centre and I was handing out flyers, was talking about what the elder Cat does on campus
and someone came up to me and they were like oh, these are cool flyers and I said yeah, you know, they have a small teaching on them
and so they said to me oh, are you Native? And I said yeah, and they're like yeah, I read about you in my Anthro book and I was like okay, I need to go away from here.
(laughs) Because I am not in the mood to explain to this person how wrong that is to say to someone.
And definitely hearing even more and even different things like that. Like, I've even heard someone say
Native people are privileged in Canada. I'm like what, okay, so your idea of privileged is lack of funding in education. Lack of funding for basic human needs
in these communities because we somehow get a tax break and we somehow get free education? What good is this so called free education when
most of our youth are dealing with alcohol and drug abuse, suicide. Dropout and teen pregnancy, tell me how good that is.
And that's, that's pretty much frustrating but when I'm surrounded by people who are socially conscious and who are awake then I feel like I can have good discussion
and I can have brainstorming ideas and I can have the good energies around me. So, I like chilling in the women's centre.
That's a pretty cool place, student center's usually a good place, there's usually an event going on or some sort of food available.
Meeting place is pretty cool, and most of the time I just like, you know, just walking around and seeing who I run into and who I can have a good talk with.
[Speaker X:] And I know that we discussed this a little bit before, like way back when when we talked on the phone, but how has
that backlash been for you when moving to Toronto and getting a westernised education? [Speaker X:] Yeah, so basically, living on the reserve.
I feel like having the type of connection I had to education varied a lot from my peers. For example, some of my peers became young mothers. Some of my peers became addicts.
Some of my peers actually passed away and some of my peers didn't finish school. So, throughout high school and throughout
even middle school, I kind of felt like I didn't really connect to my peers who lived in my community but who also were going to
the same school as me, I think that was more so because I was taking an academic stream whereas typically, a lot of the students from my community would take an applied stream
and I guess it was, it's hard because I feel like I was geared towards things that make me a westernised idea of successful
but at the same time, I'm following the path that my mom and my grandparents made for me 'cause they wanted me to
be happy and they wanted me to be educated and they wanted me to think for myself and I feel like they did a good job at it. I mean, you know, I feel like I definitely
have been blessed with those things. And when I think about my peers, you know. In high school, it was things like
oh, you act like a white girl. You're hanging out with white girls, like blah blah blah, all these, like, bullying things.
All these things, and you know. It really made me think about things and it made me think about how our people sometimes treat each other, you know?
And when you talk about things like lateral violence, lateral violence is basically. I mean, it's a product of systemic racism
because we become so oppressed that we turn to oppress ourselves, you know, because we're already at the low of the low.
So somehow, people need to get in power and then treat other people like shit. So, I know that in my community and probably in a lot of other communities too
is there's different ideas on what is considered traditional and what is considered I don't know, whitewashed, and I really
don't like that word, whitewashed. Whenever it's used in any context for any culture, it's just, I think it's just
not a nice word to say, and I guess the thing is it's kind of hard to deal with because I feel like because I'm getting this westernised education, it's like
maybe I won't be accepted by my community because the whole point of me attaining this education and getting this experience is so that
I can help these communities and I can maybe even go back to my own community and, you know, teach the youth
or implement some sort of successful programming. But it's always that fear of will I be accepted? Will they accept my ways, because it kind of ties back to that fear, right?
That fear of the education system is what's keeping people away because like I said, education for us wasn't education.
It was abuse, it was rape, and it was torture. So, you know, hate to say it, but some people still hold those ideals, right?
And I mean, I feel like going to an institution like U of T or UTSC. Like I said, you have to become a little bit assimilated, as much as you don't like it
because, you know, even when you think about the way we sit in classes and, you know. The way that lectures are presented
and the way our classes are made up, you know? It's very westernised and it's very colonial and it's funny because I feel like
I'm kind of fighting these two forces and I'm trying to break down what is this colonised system into something that is useful to me for my way of thinking
to bring it to my people, so, and it's also kind of funny because I remember what one of the elders taught me.
They said you know, the thing is people will always make fun of you. People will always judge you, people always
talk about you behind your back because, you know, they don't know what else to do, and also things like if they're gonna make fun of you
for being westernised or colonised. Look at people on The Rez who drive around in cars. Who watch TV, who have cell phones.
Those are westernised things too, so it's like calling the kettle black, right? So, it's kind of hard to deal with
but at the same time, I think that I think the thing to recognise between our people is that even though we may have different lives, I mean
we have different values and we may take on our spiritualties and cultures different ways I feel like we are all together.
We're all in the same fight, we are. And as much as, like, you know they may not like me or I might feel alienated
or I might feel whatever, it's, you know. At the end of the day, we're all human and we're all in the same fight, so. [Speaker X:] And speaking to that sense of community
and bringing it back to UTSC a little bit. Do you feel a sense of community at UTSC? [Speaker X:] Yeah, yeah, for sure, I feel like
throughout the work that I've done this year I feel like I made a lot of great friendships. Relationships, definitely met a lot of people
who are doing pretty cool work. Had a lot of great experiences. Definitely got out of my comfort zone a little bit and I feel like I totally have finally
created a sense of community for myself at UTSC. I feel like, you know, I, because of these spaces that I have either worked with or connected with
like SCSU or the women's centre or different initiatives on campus. It's like, you know, it's very comforting
to walk around and be like hey, what's up. How's your day or, you know, what are you doing this week, and it's really nice. It's really nice to have that sense because
I feel like UTSC in itself has a great sense of community. I feel like we are underrated, U of T standards but I feel like we're probably
the dopest campus because we have so many things that we can offer, you know? I feel like we're probably the only campus
across U of T where people can. You can walk down the hall and say hi to someone and you know them, or you could, you know. You're chilling somewhere and everyone's
pretty much for the most part, I know that some people would disagree, for the most part, inclusive. Thoughtful, I feel like every single
UTSC student is also opinionated whether it be about the SCC or whether it be about the Mayor of Toronto, and I feel like
I'm looking forward to this upcoming academic year in terms of event planning and Aboriginal initiatives. Aboriginal programming, and yeah.
[Speaker X:] And then every, so, when I'm doing my research on the history of Scarborough I came across, actually, this book
that was written, like, way back when. Like, detailing, like, you know. The first settlers that came in here.
Like, from it being, like, a pioneer town to, like, how it developed to where it is now. And actually, before the first white settler came to Scarborough, the land was
actually inhibited by Aboriginal people. So, like, right here, you know, there were Iroquois people.
[Speaker X:] Yeah, yeah.
[Speaker X:] So, like, knowing that, how does that make you feel? [Speaker X:] Yeah, I know that, I guess, what has become a common thing across Toronto is introducing, or
when you're hosting an event or anything like that you acknowledge the land that you're on because it's occupied land that we are on and so I know that some people in Toronto
honour the Mississauga of the New Credit and also other Iroquois nations and I guess it's really nice to feel that connection
and to feel like things like that and I know, speaking of my own history the Oneidas, we're from New York state
and we migrated throughout different parts of southwestern Ontario as well as Wisconsin state, so, thinking about that and thinking about how there used to be
Iroquois people who inhabited this land and this territory, it's really. It really makes me think of things
in perspective and makes me put things in perspective because sometimes, I imagine myself or imagine a life before contact
and I think about how the land would have looked. What our people would have been like. What daily life would have been like and to think about how much that has progressed.
I feel like most Native people say for the worst because our culture was destroyed but some people say for the best because
they got nice hats and beaver pelts and corn and beans and squash. I feel like it definitely makes me feel empowered
and it makes me feel like I'm reclaiming space and it makes me feel like I'm taking back something that I never had, and it makes me feel like I belong, but it also makes me feel like
it's a struggle, I guess the thing is the traditional mindset that we had and that we still have is that we have to
think seven generations ahead because the seven generations before us thought of us and when I think of myself in this institution.
When I think of myself and me and my family and my experiences and what I've learned is seven generations ago, someone was thinking of me, so I have to live my life
and I have to push for things and I have to make things happen for the next seven generations, so hearing about things, like, there used to be
people like me here that used to inhabit this planet. It makes me feel almost more powerful and it makes me feel like, it makes things feel right
and it makes things feel whole. Like things are in a good light because before, people weren't allowed to be on this land or this land was taken away from them
but now, I'm on this land and I'm taking everything I can out of it. (laughs)
If that means going to school for five or six years, yeah. [Speaker X:] And when you hear the words diversity and inclusivity, when it comes to UTSC
and being on campus, what does that mean to you? [Speaker X:] Yeah, I feel like in terms of UTSC I feel like it's definitely a very diverse campus. I feel like it definitely has huge huge huge
population of students that are coming from all over the world, all over everywhere and a bunch of different identities
even in terms of sexual orientation or, you know, whatever the fuck that means, you know? And I think, like, one thing that I learned is that
the diversity that we have, we really shouldn't be living colorblind because being colorblind, oh, I don't see anyone for their colours, I treat everyone the same
and it's kind of like well, shouldn't we appreciate everyone for their colours as well as treat everyone the same?
And even when I think of the teachings from the elders, I think of, you know. We have the four colours, we have
red, white, black, and yellow, and we have to think of where people are coming from in terms of those colours and that we may represent these colours, but at the same time
we are all equal, and we all make up a portion of the circle just as much as the next person, as the next person
and we're all human, and we have to treat each other the same, and sometimes I find other people have those same ideals
and that's hard to deal with, but all you can do is, you know, live your life in a good light, and hopefully others follow and I feel like the diversity is really great.
The high school that I went to actually was pretty diverse too 'cause I went to a high school in downtown London, Ontario
and there was a lot of people from various backgrounds. Various socio-economical makeups and, you know, when I come to Scarborough
it's pretty much the same, and definitely feel like. I definitely feel like it's awesome that people are coming here because it's so diverse, that's a good thing about it is that
we have so many different perspectives and we have different ways of thinking and learning coming together and collaborating
because when you think of, I think of the analogy of a salad, when you think of a salad, right, you're like oh, I don't want
my salad to be plain, I want everything. I want green peppers, I want red peppers. I want cucumbers, I want almonds. I want this, I want that, and it tastes
so much better when it's got all those flavours in it and all those colours are so beautiful together. But when you think of just, you know.
Lettuce in a bowl, it's so boring, it's so plain. There's no sustenance, it doesn't taste good. So, that's what I love about UTSC is, you know.
It's just very colourful, it's very beautiful, and yeah. [Speaker X:] And is there anything else that you wanted to add or to quote or anything at all? [Speaker X:] I guess just I'm really thankful that
there's projects like this and I also. It's really great to look at it in perspective because if you think about our campus.
Our campus is a very racialized campus. Our campus has, from what I heard, we have the largest amount of students who are actually
working part time or working jobs outside of school to support their education and, you know, it really shows that UTSC students are a community around here.
They're really hard workers, and they also care a lot about their communities and I guess it's really great that
these things are happening because 50, 60 years ago, these things wouldn't happen so, you know, you have to hear these stories
because they're important and they're integral to our growing history, and another thing I guess to add is that, you know. I don't really identify myself as Canadian
because I'm a hu-da-na-sho-nee woman. I'm an Oneida woman, I'm not Canadian because I don't believe in these colonised borders.
I don't have a passport, but maybe I should get one. So, I think the thing to recognise too is that as Canadian citizens, we're all treaty people, and yeah.
[Speaker X:] One thing I really want to get on tape is you know the first time that we talked and you introduced yourself?
[Speaker X:] Okay, yeah. [Speaker X:] Can you do that and just, like.
So he knows how you did before. [Speaker X:] Okay, so this is me introducing myself. (speaking foreign language)
So, that's, this is me, Diane, my colonised name is Diane and my spirit name is Gai-doo-hay and it means someone who writes, and my clan is Bear Clan
and I'm from Oneida, Oneida Nation of the Thames and yeah. [Speaker X:] That was good, thank you, I think we were like, almost.